# JavaScript if...else Statement
In computer programming, there may arise situations where you have to run a block of code among more than one alternatives. For example, assigning grades A, B or C based on marks obtained by a student.

In such situations, you can use the JavaScript ```if...else``` statement to create a program that can make decisions.

***

In JavaScript, there are three forms of the if...else statement.

* **if** statement
* **if...else** statement
* **if...else if...else** statement

***

## JavaScript if Statement
The syntax of the ```if``` statement is:

```js
if (condition) {
    // the body of if
}
```

The ```if``` statement evaluates the condition inside the parenthesis ```()```.

1. If the condition is evaluated to ```true```, the code inside the body of ```if``` is executed.
2. If the condition is evaluated to ```false```, the code inside the body of ```if``` is skipped.

***

### Example 1: if Statement

```js
// check if the number is positive

const number = prompt("Enter a number: ");

// check if number is greater than 0
if (number > 0) {
 // the body of the if statement
  console.log("The number is positive");
}

console.log("The if statement is easy");
```

**Output 1**

```
Enter a number: 2
The number is positive
The if statement is easy
```

Suppose the user entered 2. In this case, the condition ```number > 0``` evaluates to ```true```. And, the body of the ```if``` statement is executed.

**Output 2**

```
Enter a number: -1
The if statement is easy
```

Suppose the user entered -1. In this case, the condition ```number > 0``` evaluates to ```false```. Hence, the body of the ```if``` statement is skipped.

Since ```console.log("The if statement is easy");``` is outside the body of the ```if``` statement, it is always executed.

***

## JavaScript if...else statement
An ```if``` statement can have an optional ```else``` clause. The syntax of the ```if...else``` statement is:

```js
if (condition) {
    // block of code if condition is true
} else {
   // block of code if condition is false
}
```

The ```if..else``` statement evaluates the condition inside the parenthesis.

If the condition is evaluated to ```true```,

1. the code inside the body of ```if``` is executed
2. the code inside the body of ```else``` is skipped from execution

<br>

If the condition is evaluated to ```false```,
1. the code inside the body of ```else``` is executed
2. the code inside the body of ```if``` is skipped from execution

### Example 2: if…else Statement

```js
// check if the number is positive or negative/zero

const number = prompt("Enter a number: ");

// check if number is greater than 0
if (number > 0) {
  console.log("The number is positive");
}
// if number is not greater than 0
else {
  console.log("The number is either a negative number or 0");
}

console.log("The if...else statement is easy");
```
Output 1

Enter a number: 2
The number is positive
The if...else statement is easy
Suppose the user entered 2. In this case, the condition number > 0 evaluates to true. Hence, the body of the if statement is executed and the body of the else statement is skipped.

Output 2

Enter a number: -1
The number is either a negative number or 0
The if...else statement is easy
Suppose the user entered -1. In this case, the condition number > 0 evaluates to false. Hence, the body of the else statement is executed and the body of the if statement is skipped.

***

